This project started because I was unsatisfied with the methods of creating tunings used by many in the xenharmonic community. While the structured nature of these methods make them very powerful, that same predetermined structure also has a tendency to limit what a scale's tuning could look like. While I should also admit that the unintentionally obfuscating use of highly idiosyncratic terminology made it difficult for me to get into them, I strongly believe that this method could be of some use to anyone who enjoys experimenting with tuning.

Fundimental to the method is the observation that a scale can be conceptualised as a grid (as in Grid Theory) where nodes represent notes and edges represent intervals. A tuning of all notes in a scale can be reached by periodically taking the geometric mean of the results of subpaths of paths to to a all notes in that scale. Due to the inherently explosive growth of path cardinality in graphs, computing such a tuning can take a very long time. So, an arbitrary lower interval weight limit is used, which nonetheless has minimal impact on the final tuning of each note.

From an aesthetic perspective, I enjoy the fact that such a tuning will never quite be predictable - no interval will ever be pure and no two instances of the same interval will be tuned identically. This type of unpredictability mimics the pitch imprecision of acoustic instuments (e.g. imperfect string intonation or the effects of temperature change on brass instruments) which I find to be one of many subtle depths that such instruments have over digitally tuned ones. It occurs to me you could even tune an acoustic instrument according to one of these tunings. At it's best, this could mimic the type of tunings used in musical traditions which favour tuning by ear.

To experiment for yourself take a look at the file TuningMaker.cpp. Feel free to reach out with any questions, corrections, or comments. I intend to make a YouTube video explaining the idea within the year. For those looking for a paper on this method, there is one but it needs to be updated, which is low on my to-do list as I feel that without links to academia a YouTube video will have more reach.

E-mail: jamespatbyrne60@gmail.com
